{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Tahoma-Bold;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Italic;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
{\info
{\author jmcdonald}}\margl1440\margr1440\margb1800\margt1800\vieww38100\viewh19880\viewkind1
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Choose References Carefully\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 The best references are people in your professional network who have first-hand knowledge of your past work or level of skills. That can include professors and academic advisors but excludes family members.\
You should have a clear reason for asking the individual for a letter of recommendation or reference. Did the person supervise your work? Did they collaborate with you as a peer? Are they prominent in the field and so have more credibility as a reference? If there is a form that accompanies the application it might indicate what the reader is looking for. Use that knowledge to help choose a reference.\
Sometimes a person who is technically or professionally knowledgeable is not a good communicator. Ideally, you want a person who knows you and your work and can also convey that clearly and enthusiastically. If they don\'92t often write letters, approach them earlier and give them more time.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Coordinate Your References\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 If the application asks for multiple letters (three is common), have them fit together rather than repeat the same things. Know why you are asking the person for help. Can they talk about your skills? Have they seen you deal with customers or patients? Do they know about your work ethic?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Give Them an Opportunity to Say No
\fs26 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Nothing is worse than a lukewarm recommendation. If they cannot honestly write an enthusiastic letter of support for you, they can (and should) decline. Give them a chance to say no gracefully. You should maintain a number of professional relationships so that you have options in case someone declines.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Talk to the Person Writing the Letter
\fs26 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Once they accept, you should have a brief conversation with the reference to tell them about the position and how it fits in your plans. The letter writer may see only one facet of your life; they can write a better letter if they see how their interaction with you fits into the larger picture of what you\'92d like to accomplish. Tell them why you are applying for the position and what you hope to do. Tell them what you have done to prepare for this opportunity.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Provide a Short R\'e9sum\'e9 or \'93Brag Sheet\'94
\fs26 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 The best references are from people who have known you for a long time. It is helpful to remind them about things you have done even if they were there. (At the very least it saves them time if you can provide dates and comments about jobs, projects, or classes.) It is also helpful to tell them about other things related to the position. For example, a professor writing for your medical school application should know about the time you shadowed a doctor or that you worked in a medical office.\
You can provide a r\'e9sum\'e9 or a short (one page) list of activities with comments for the letter writer. If you are applying for a job, give them the same r\'e9sum\'e9 the prospective employer has. If you would like them to emphasize something, tell them that. If more than one person is writing a letter, let each of them know who else is writing letters and how their letter fits in with the other references.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Special Circumstances\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Sometimes there is an issue with your background (
\f2\i e.g.
\f1\i0 , a gap in employment or a change of profession) that you would like the letter writer to put in context. If so, you should discuss this in detail with your reference. Keep in mind they can\'92t lie! You should choose a good communicator with first-hand knowledge of the issue. Realize this is over and above just writing a letter. Treat it that way!\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Logistics\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 Make sure the writer knows:\uc0\u8232 \'95 When the letter is due and how it will be delivered (
\f2\i viz
\f1\i0 ., sent online, mailed, picked up by you).\uc0\u8232 \'95 Wether you have waived your right to see the letter. (It will carry more weight if you do.)\u8232 \'95 Whom the letter should be addressed to. (You may have to do some research on that.)\u8232 \'95 Whether there are any additional forms that need to be submitted by them.\
You do not need to provide an envelope or stamps for a professor; University letterhead and envelopes are actually more appropriate.\
It is acceptable to send a polite e-mail a day or two before the deadline reminding the reference about the letter. However, don\'92t nag them.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Afterwards\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0 \cf0 It is polite to give your references an update when you hear back about your application. A thank you e-mail is a minimum. You might decide to send a written thank you note to someone who put in extra effort on your behalf.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sb120\partightenfactor0

\f0\b \cf0 Maintaining Your Network
\fs26 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa120\partightenfactor0

\f1\b0\fs24 \cf0 Generally speaking, by the time you graduate you should have a minimum of five references: at least one supervisor, three other professional references, and a personal character reference. (The character reference should still not be a family member.) After a few years, you should build that up to nine: six professional and three personal. While no single application or position will require that many references, having a number of different references in different occupations will allow you to choose people who are best suited for each application.\
You should keep up with your references on a regular basis. This can simply be a short e-mail once or twice a year to let them know how you are doing. You can set your e-mail to remind you contact someone at a specific date (the start of the school year, the holidays, 
\f2\i etc
\f1\i0 .) or use special occasions (a promotion or a job change) as a reason to keep in touch. Professional networks like LinkedIn can actually make this fairly easy.\
}